Update experiments doc (#6164)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/docs/experiments/manual.mdx

Reviewer: We should likely also change this URL.

[I think we settled on using A/B testing.](https://github.com/PostHog/product-internal/issues/459)

    enterprise: full
---

A/B testing enables you to test the impact of product changes and understand how they affect your users' behaviour. For example:

> - You can test how changes to your onboarding flow affect your signup rate.
> - You can test different designs of your app's dashboard to identify which one increases user engagement and retention.
> - You can test the impact of offering a free trial period versus a money-back guarantee to determine which approach results in more paying customers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- How changes to your onboarding flow affect your signup rate.
- If different designs of your app's dashboard increase user engagement and retention.
- The impact of offering a free trial period versus a money-back guarantee to determine which approach results in more paying customers.
```

A/B tests are also sometimes referred to as "experiments", and this is how we refer to them in the PostHog app.

## How to create an experiment in PostHog

> To create a new experiment, go to the [experiments tab](https://app.posthog.com/experiments) in the PostHog app. Then click on the "New experiment" button in the top right.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a new experiment, go to the [experiments tab](https://app.posthog.com/experiments) in the PostHog app, and click on the "New experiment" button in the top right.
```

> This will present you with a form where you can complete the details of your new experiment:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This presents you with a form where you can complete the details of your new experiment:
```

![How to create an experiment in PostHog](../../images/features/experiments/create-experiment.png)

Here's a breakdown of each field in the form:

### Feature flag key

> Each experiment is backed by a [feature flag](/docs/feature-flags/manual). In your code, you'll use this feature flag key to check which experiment variant the user has been assigned to. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each experiment is backed by a [feature flag](/docs/feature-flags/manual). In your code, you use this feature flag key to check which experiment variant the user has been assigned to. 
```

> > **Advanced:** It's possible to create experiments without using PostHog's feature flags (for example, if you you're a different library for feature flags). For more info, read our docs on [implementing experiments without feature flags](// TODO add link here) 

Author: Will update this TODO in the next PR. Same for the other TODOs around "implementing experiments without feature flags"

### Experiment variants

> By default, all experiments have a 'control' and 'test' variant. If you have more variants that you'd like to test, you can use this field to add more variants and run multivariant tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, all experiments have a 'control' and 'test' variant. If you have more variants that you'd like to test, you can use this field to add more variants and run multivariant tests. Participants are automatically split between variants.
```

### Participant type

> If you've created [groups](/docs/product-analytics/group-analytics) in PostHog, you can use this field to run [group-targeted experiments](/blog/running-group-targeted-ab-tests). This will test how a change affects your product at a group-level. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default is users, but if you've created [groups](/docs/product-analytics/group-analytics) in PostHog, you can use this field to run [group-targeted experiments](/blog/running-group-targeted-ab-tests). This will test how a change affects your product at a group-level. 
```

### Participant targeting

> By default, your experiment will target 100% of participants. If you'd like to target a more specific set of participants, or change rollout percentage, you'll need to do this on the feature flag that will be used by your experiment.

Reviewer: This is a bit unclear, you can set filters on the experiment screen, but you also might need to go to the feature flag itself?

Reviewer 2: I'll delete filters on experiments screen soon.

Below is a video showing this:

> // TODO Add video of how to do this

Author: Waiting for @neilkakkar's change before adding this

### Experiment goal

> Setting your goal metric will enable PostHog to automatically keep track of your goal metrics and let you know if your results are statiscally signifcant. You can select between a "trend" or "conversion funnel" goal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting your goal metric enable PostHog to calculate the impact of your experiment and if your results are [statistically significant](/docs/experiments/significance). You can select between a "trend" or "conversion funnel" goal.
```
What is the difference between trend and conversion funnel? When would you want to use one vs the other?

Reviewer 2: Aside: We always want to push users towards funnel experiments; they're easier to setup; results are more reliable; and harder to get wrong. Trends have too many gotchas we've seen people fall for.

> A minimum acceptable improvement calculator is only shown on the screen. This combines historical data from your goal metric with your desired improvement rate to show you how long you'll need to run your experiment for in order to see statiscal significant results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You set the minimum acceptable improvement below. This combines historical data from your goal metric with your desired improvement rate to show you how long you'll need to run your experiment for in order to see statistical significant results.
```

![Minimum acceptable improvement calculator](../../images/features/experiments/improvement-calculator.mp4)

> > **Note:** When selecting an event that is submitted from your server, you may see an warning that no feature flag information can be detected with the event. To resolve this issue, see [step 2 of adding your experiment code and how to submit feature flag information with your events](/docs/experiments/manual#step-2-server-side-only-upload-the-feature-flag-property-with-your-events).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** If you select a server-side event, you may see a warning that no feature flag information can be detected with the event. To resolve this issue, see [step 2 of adding your experiment code and how to submit feature flag information with your events](/docs/experiments/manual#step-2-server-side-only-upload-the-feature-flag-property-with-your-events).
```

> 
> ![Experiment goal warning](../../images/features/experiments/experiment-goal-warning.png)

## Adding your experiment code

### Step 1: Fetch the feature flag

To check which variant of your experiment to show to your participants, use the following code to fetch the feature flag:

> <MultiLanguage>

Reviewer: Maybe you can split this into frontend vs backend and mention the need for distinct_id on the backend? And how users get automatically split.

```javascript
// Ensure flags are loaded before usage.
// You'll only need to call this on the code the first time a user visits.
// See this doc for more details: https://posthog.com/docs/feature-flags/manual#ensuring-flags-are-loaded-before-usage
posthog.onFeatureFlags(function() {
    // feature flags should be available at this point

>     if (posthog.getFeatureFlag('experiment_feature_flag_name')  == 'variant_name') {

Reviewer: If you decide to do this, can you cmd-f replace them all? It is a lot of work to suggest for each one 😅

        // do something
    }
})

// Otherwise, you can just do:

> if (posthog.getFeatureFlag('experiment_feature_flag_name')  == 'variant_name') {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if (posthog.getFeatureFlag('experiment-flag-key')  == 'variant-name') {
```

Author: done in https://github.com/PostHog/posthog.com/pull/6189/files

    // do something
}

// You can also test your code by overriding the feature flag:

> // e.g., posthog.feature_flags.override({'experiment_feature_flag_name': 'test'})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// e.g., posthog.feature_flags.override({'experiment-flag-key': 'test'})
```

if ($variant === 'variant_name') {
    // Do something differently for this user
}
```

```ruby
variant = posthog.get_feature_flag('experiment_feature_flag_name', 'user_distinct_id')

if variant == 'variant_name'
    # Do something 
end
```

```go
variant, err := client.GetFeatureFlag(
            FeatureFlagPayload{
                Key:        'experiment_feature_flag_name',
                DistinctId: "user_distinct_id",
            })

if variant == 'variant_name' {
    // Do something
}
```

```java
// Feature flags are not supported in our Java SDK.
// To run an experiment using our Java SDK, 
// see our docs on running an experiment without feature flags
// TODO add link
```

```rust
// Feature flags are not supported in our Rust SDK.
// To run an experiment using our Java SDK, 
// see our docs on running an experiment without feature flags
// TODO add link
```

```elixir
// Feature flags are not supported in our Elixir SDK.
// To run an experiment using our Java SDK, 
// see our docs on running an experiment without feature flags
// TODO add link
```

```API
// See our docs on running an experiment without feature flags
// TODO add link
```
</MultiLanguage>

> ### Step 2: (Server-side only) Upload the feature flag property with your events 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 2 (server-side only): Add the feature flag property to your events 
```

Reviewer: If you split the code blocks, you can include this in them.

    event: 'event_name_of_your_goal_metric',
    properties: {
        '$feature/experiment_feature_flag_name': 'variant_name'
    },
})
```

```python
posthog.capture(
    'distinct_id',
    'event_name_of_your_goal_metric',
    {
        '$feature/experiment_feature_flag_name': 'variant_name'
    }
)
```

```php
PostHog::capture(array(
  'distinctId' => 'distinct_id',
  'event' => 'event_name_of_your_goal_metric',
  'properties' => array(
    '$feature/experiment_feature_flag_name'  = 'variant_name'
  )
));
```

```ruby
posthog.capture({
    distinct_id: 'distinct_id',
    event: 'event_name_of_your_goal_metric',
    properties: {
        '$feature/experiment_feature_flag_name': 'variant_name',
    }
})
```

```go
client.Enqueue(posthog.Capture{
  DistinctId: "distinct_id",
  Event:      "event_name_of_your_goal_metric",
  Properties: posthog.NewProperties().
    Set("$feature/experiment_feature_flag_name", "variant_name"),
})
```

```java
posthog.capture(
  "distinct_id",
  "event_name_of_your_goal_metric",
  new HashMap<String, Object>() {
    {
      put("$feature/experiment_feature_flag_name", "variant_name");
    }
  }
);
```

</MultiLanguage>

## Launching your experiment

> Once you've written your code, it's a good idea to test that each variant behaves as you'd expect. If you find out your implementation had a bug after you've launched the experiment, you lose days of effort as the experiment results can no longer be trusted.

Reviewer: How do you test?

Reviewer 2: variant overrides - is the way to go, we should promote this over the toolbar, which can get unreliable.

Author: I added the variant override code snippet to the JS and react code, but it's not available in the other SDKs

Author: Thanks! I'll include this

Once you're satisfied, you're ready to launch your experiment.

> **Note:** The feature flag is activated only when you launch the experiment.

> **Note:** While the [PostHog toolbar](/docs/product-analytics/toolbar) enables you to toggle feature flags on and off, this only works for active feature flags and won't work for your experiment feature flag while it is still in draft mode.

## Viewing experiment results

While the experiment is running, you can see results on the page:

![Viewing experiment results](../../images/features/experiments/experiment-results.png)

Sometimes, in the beginning of an experiment, results can be skewed to one side while enough data is being still gathered. While peeking at preliminary results is not a problem, making quick decisions based on them is [problematic](/blog/ab-testing-mistakes#3-conducting-an-experiment-without-a-predetermined-duration). We advise you to wait until your experiment has had a chance to gather enough data.

## Ending an experiment

Here is checklist of things to do when ready to end your experiment:
-   [ ] Click on "Stop" button on the experiment page. This will ensure final results are stored.

> -   [ ] Remove your experiment code and launch the winning variant to all your users.

Reviewer: Can you rollout the winning feature flag to 100% of users after an experiment is done? We should recommend doing that before removing the code.

Reviewer 2: There's a banner recommending this once you end the experiment. Indeed we should.

-   [ ] Share results with your team.

> -   [ ] Document conclusions and findings in your PostHog experiment. This will help preserve historical context for future team members.

Reviewer: How? Update description?

> -   [ ] Archive the experiment. This will disable the feature flag and ensure your code no longer depends on the flag.

Reviewer 2: oh, I don't think archiving does anything to the flag.

### Further reading

Want to learn more about how to run successful experiments in PostHog? Try these tutorials:

> -   [8 annoying A/B testing mistakes every engineer should know]([/tutorials/experiments](https://posthog.com/blog/ab-testing-mistakes))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   [8 annoying A/B testing mistakes every engineer should know][/tutorials/experiments]
```

    enterprise: full
---

A/B testing enables you to test the impact of product changes and understand how they affect your users' behaviour. For example:

- How changes to your onboarding flow affect your signup rate.
- If different designs of your app's dashboard increase user engagement and retention.

> - The impact of offering a free trial period versus a money-back guarantee to determine which approach results in more paying customers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The impact a free trial period versus money-back guarantee to determine which results in more customers.
```

> A/B tests are also sometimes referred to as "experiments", and this is how we refer to them in the PostHog app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A/B tests are also referred to as "experiments", and this is how we refer to them in the PostHog app.
```

## How to create an experiment in PostHog

To create a new experiment, go to the [experiments tab](https://app.posthog.com/experiments) in the PostHog app, and click on the "New experiment" button in the top right.

This presents you with a form where you can complete the details of your new experiment:

![How to create an experiment in PostHog](../../images/features/experiments/create-experiment.png)

Here's a breakdown of each field in the form:

### Feature flag key

Each experiment is backed by a [feature flag](/docs/feature-flags/manual). In your code, you use this feature flag key to check which experiment variant the user has been assigned to. 

> **Advanced:** It's possible to create experiments without using PostHog's feature flags (for example, if you you're a different library for feature flags). For more info, read our docs on [implementing experiments without feature flags](// TODO add link here) 

> ### Experiment variants

Reviewer: Technically, you are missing description here, but its optional. Don't know if it matters to include.

By default, all experiments have a 'control' and 'test' variant. If you have more variants that you'd like to test, you can use this field to add more variants and run multivariant tests. Participants are automatically split equally between variants.

> 

Reviewer: Do you want to add a note on overrides here? "Participants are automatically split equally between variants. If you want specific users in a specific variant, you can set up manual overrides" (and add a link?)

Author: Sounds good. I'll add this in the part 3 PR, since I added that question to the FAQ there, so I can link to it there https://github.com/PostHog/posthog.com/pull/6189/files

### Participant type

> The default is users, but if you've created [groups](/docs/product-analytics/group-analytics) in PostHog, you can use this field to run [group-targeted experiments](/blog/running-group-targeted-ab-tests). This will test how a change affects your product at a group-level. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default is users, but if you've created [groups](/docs/product-analytics/group-analytics), you can run [group-targeted experiments](/blog/running-group-targeted-ab-tests). This will test how a change affects your product at a group-level by providing the same variant to every member of a group.
```

### Participant targeting

> By default, your experiment will target 100% of participants. If you'd like to target a more specific set of participants, or change the rollout percentage, you'll need to do this by changing the [release conditions](/docs/feature-flags/rollout-strategies) for the feature flag that will be used by your experiment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, your experiment will target 100% of participants. If you'd like to target a more specific set of participants, or change the rollout percentage, you'll need to do this by changing the [release conditions](/docs/feature-flags/rollout-strategies) for the feature flag used by your experiment.
```

Below is a video showing how to navigate there:

![How to set experiment feature flag release conditions](../../images/features/experiments/set-experiment-rollout.mp4)

### Experiment goal

> Setting your goal metric enable PostHog to calculate the impact of your experiment and if your results are [statistically significant](/docs/experiments/significance). You can select between a "trend" or "conversion funnel" goal.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Setting your goal metric enables PostHog to calculate the impact of your experiment and if your results are [statistically significant](/docs/experiments/significance). You can select between a "trend" or "conversion funnel" goal.
```

> You set the minimum acceptable improvement below. This combines historical data from your goal metric with your desired improvement rate to show you how long you'll need to run your experiment for in order to see statistical significant results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You set the minimum acceptable improvement below. This combines historical data from your goal metric with your desired improvement rate to show a prediction for how long you need to run your experiment to see statistical significant results.
```

![Minimum acceptable improvement calculator](../../images/features/experiments/improvement-calculator.mp4)

> > **Note:** If you select a server-side event, you may see a warning that no feature flag information can be detected with the event. To resolve this issue, see [step 2 of adding your experiment code and how to submit feature flag information with your events](/docs/experiments/manual#step-2-server-side-only-upload-the-feature-flag-property-with-your-events).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** If you select a server-side event, you may see a warning that no feature flag information can be detected with the event. To resolve this issue, see [step 2 of adding your experiment code and how to submit feature flag information with your events](#step-2-server-side-only-upload-the-feature-flag-property-with-your-events).
```

}
```

```ruby
variant = posthog.get_feature_flag('experiment_feature_flag_name', 'user_distinct_id')

if variant == 'variant_name'
    # Do something 
end
```

```go
variant, err := client.GetFeatureFlag(
            FeatureFlagPayload{
                Key:        'experiment_feature_flag_name',
                DistinctId: "user_distinct_id",
            })

if variant == 'variant_name' {
    // Do something
}
```

```java
// Feature flags are not supported in our Java SDK.
// To run an experiment using our Java SDK, 
// see our docs on running an experiment without feature flags
// TODO add link
```

```rust
// Feature flags are not supported in our Rust SDK.
// To run an experiment using our Java SDK, 
// see our docs on running an experiment without feature flags
// TODO add link
```

```elixir
// Feature flags are not supported in our Elixir SDK.
// To run an experiment using our Java SDK, 
// see our docs on running an experiment without feature flags
// TODO add link
```

```API
// See our docs on running an experiment without feature flags
// TODO add link
```
</MultiLanguage>

### Step 2 (server-side only): Add the feature flag property to your events 

> For any server-side events that are also goal metrics for your experiment, you'll need to include a property `$feature/experiment_feature_flag_name: variant_name` when submitting those events. This ensures that the event is attributed to the correct experiment variant (e.g., test or control).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For any server-side events that are also goal metrics for your experiment, you need to include a property `$feature/experiment_feature_flag_name: variant_name` when capturing those events. This ensures that the event is attributed to the correct experiment variant (e.g., test or control).
```

> This step is not required for events that are submitted via our client-side SDKs (e.g., JavaScript, iOS, Android, React, React Native)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This step is not required for events that are submitted via our client-side SDKs (e.g., JavaScript, iOS, Android, React, React Native).
```

    }
)
```

```php
PostHog::capture(array(
  'distinctId' => 'distinct_id',
  'event' => 'event_name_of_your_goal_metric',
  'properties' => array(
    '$feature/experiment_feature_flag_name'  = 'variant_name'
  )
));
```

```ruby
posthog.capture({
    distinct_id: 'distinct_id',
    event: 'event_name_of_your_goal_metric',
    properties: {
        '$feature/experiment_feature_flag_name': 'variant_name',
    }
})
```

```go
client.Enqueue(posthog.Capture{
  DistinctId: "distinct_id",
  Event:      "event_name_of_your_goal_metric",
  Properties: posthog.NewProperties().
    Set("$feature/experiment_feature_flag_name", "variant_name"),
})
```

```java
posthog.capture(
  "distinct_id",
  "event_name_of_your_goal_metric",
  new HashMap<String, Object>() {
    {
      put("$feature/experiment_feature_flag_name", "variant_name");
    }
  }
);
```

</MultiLanguage>

## Testing and launching your experiment

Once you've written your code, it's a good idea to test that each variant behaves as you'd expect. If you find out your implementation had a bug after you've launched the experiment, you lose days of effort as the experiment results can no longer be trusted.

> The best way to do this is to add an optional override to your release conditions. For example, you can create an override to assign a user to the 'test' variant if their email address is from someone in your engineering team. You can do this by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The best way to do this is adding an optional override to your release conditions. For example, you can create an override to assign a user to the 'test' variant if their email is your own (or someone in your engineering team). You can do this by:
```

> 1. Go to your experiment feature flag.

Reviewer: Would it also be good to set the rollout to 0% for other users while testing?

2. Ensure the feature flag is enabled by checking the "Enable feature flag" box.

> 3. Add a new condition set with the condition to `email = your_email@domain.com`. Set the rollout percentage for this set to 100%

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Add a new condition set with the condition to `email = your_email@domain.com`. Set the rollout percentage for this set to 100%.
```

> **Note:** The feature flag is activated only when you launch the experiment, or if you've manually checked the "Enable feature flag" box.

> **Note:** While the [PostHog toolbar](/docs/product-analytics/toolbar) enables you to toggle feature flags on and off, this only works for active feature flags and won't work for your experiment feature flag while it is still in draft mode.

## Viewing experiment results

While the experiment is running, you can see results on the page:

![Viewing experiment results](../../images/features/experiments/experiment-results.png)

Sometimes, in the beginning of an experiment, results can be skewed to one side while enough data is being still gathered. While peeking at preliminary results is not a problem, making quick decisions based on them is [problematic](/blog/ab-testing-mistakes#3-conducting-an-experiment-without-a-predetermined-duration). We advise you to wait until your experiment has had a chance to gather enough data.

## Ending an experiment

Here is checklist of things to do when ready to end your experiment:
-   [ ] Click on "Stop" button on the experiment page. This will ensure final results are stored.

> -   [ ] Roll out the winning variant of your experiment by setting the feature flag conditions accordingly. This ensures that your users see the winning variant before you've had a chance to make any code changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   [ ] Roll out the winning variant of your experiment by setting the feature flag conditions accordingly. This ensures that your users see the winning variant without needing to make any code changes.
```

> -   [ ] Remove your experiment code and launch the code for the winning variant to all your users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   [ ] Remove the experiment and losing variant's code to launch the winning variant to all your users.
```

-   [ ] Share results with your team.
-   [ ] Document conclusions and findings in the "description" field your PostHog experiment. This will help preserve historical context for future team members.
-   [ ] Archive the experiment.

### Further reading

Want to learn more about how to run successful experiments in PostHog? Try these tutorials:

> -   [8 annoying A/B testing mistakes every engineer should know][/tutorials/experiments]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-   [8 annoying A/B testing mistakes every engineer should know](/blog/ab-testing-mistakes)
```
